---
layout:     post
title:      AES crypto notes
subtitle:   
date:       2020-04-15
author:     Rain
header-img: img/clarkson.jpg
catalog: true
tags:    
 - Security
 - Cryptography
---

symetric :
    - stream ciphor
    - block ciphor --> AES
    
plan :
    today: AES, 
    next lecture: Digital Signature, Hashing, MAC, 
    last lecture: black box and white box fuzzing.


Symmetric key cryptographer

    - stream ciphers:  handles one bit at a time.
         x_i(input) -->key(eg. XOR)-->y_i(output)
    - block cipher: divide the message into fixed size blocks

    [ /  /  ] 128bits input--->key(AES)----->[  /   /]128bit output

    AES(advanced encryption standard)

    Why are we even looking at AES? - it is the most widely used encryption algorithm in the world.


History of AES:

DES - Data Encryption standard is proposed by IBM.

1997- contest generated the next generation of symmetric key algorthrm NIST

1999- selected 5 finalists.

2000 - 'Rijndael' two belgian cryptographer(Joan daemen, vincent Rijmen) was choosen by NIST.
2001 - standarized 

AES was developed in collaboration with researchers and was analysed by thousands of researchers and users.

128 bits == 16 bytes
---
padding scheme, PKCS

prcess:
key addition->block substitution->shift rows->mix cols -> key addition(k rounds)
last round:
->key addition->byte substitution->shift rows->key addition


------
key addition:  data state XOR key   data state(data after some rounds)

the number of rounds depends on the key.

AES-256 bit encryption is considered to be "solid"

Byte substitutio:
A0 ,.....A15 16 8-bit data blok
|         |
|         |
s-box     [ byte substitution layer ]
|         |
|         |
B0        B15


B_i = S(A_i)

byte substitution used proper    finite fields---Galor's Fields


shift rows: 
mix cols:
provides diffusiong which ensures that change in single bit in the state influence all the text

----
To understand S-boxes and overall AES, we have to revisit finite fields

Finite fields(galois Field): is a finite set of elements , it has 2 operations: +,*

for +, 0 is identity 
for *, 1 is identity

it forms an additve group with '+' with identity element 0.

it forms an multiplicative group(excluding 0) with '*' with indentity elelment 1.

when two group operations are mixed, distributivity holds. :
$a(b+c) = ab+ac$

R -  field (+,*), Cryptography - finite fields ( has finite number of elements)

finite fields only exists if they have p^m elements where m is a positive integer and p is a prime number.

order of a froup 

Example:
 There is a finite field with 11 element GF(11^1)
 There is a finite field with 27 element GF(3^3)
 There is a finite field with 11 element GF(11^1)
 
 two type of finite fields Gf(p^m):
  - m=1 ,GF(P) , prime fields
  - m>1, GF(p^m), extention fields

prime fields, GF(P),

> how do you compute in extension fields?

elements of GF(2^m) are polynomials of the form
$a_{m-1}x^{m-1}+a_{m-2}x^{m-2}+.....+a_0x^0$

Interesting thing about the polynomials are their coefficient.

$a_i \in GF(2) = \{0,1\}$ 

Ex:
  GF(2^3)  , what is the order of GF(2^3).

Enumerate all the polynomial we are going to have:
        A(x)  (a2,a1,a0)
GF(2^3)={
         
         0,      (0,0,0)
         1,      (0,0,1)
         x,      (0,1,0)
         x+1,    (0,1,1)
         x^2,    (1,0,0)
         x^2+1,  (1,0,1)
         X^2+x,  (1,1,0)
         X^2+x+1,(1,1,1)
}
---
addition:
in GF(2) ,addition and subtraction are identical.
a_i \in GF(2), addtion/subtraction of co-effiennt mean the same in GF(2)
A(x)+B(x) = C(x)

ci=ai+bi mod 2
---
multiplication:

$$ A(x)B(x) =(X^2+x+1)(X^2+1)$$

 $$ = X^4+x^3+x^2+X^2+x+1 mod2$$
 $$ = x^4+x^3+x+1 = C(x) $$

 C(x) is not in the finite field.

 GF(7): 3*4 = 12 mod 7 = 5 mod 7

 solution: Reduce C(x) modulo a polynomial that behave like a prime. "irreducible polynomials"
P(x) = amx^m +......a_0x_0 (one degree higher than GF(2^m))

 E.g : $GF(2^3)$: P(x) = $x^3+x+1$
                : p(x) = $

c(x) = c'(x) mod P(x)

```
"AES irreducible polynomial"
     key addition            <--
         |                     |
     byte substitution         |
         |                     | 
    shift rows                 |
         |                     | 
    mix cols                   | 
         |                     |
         -----------------------
         |
    Byte substitution
         |
         shift row
         |
         key addition
         |
         output
```

Byte substitute layer of AES
S(Ai) = Bi
s_box is the non-linear element 8 AES

size of Ai = 8bit
2^8 = 256 distinct element.

s-box:


```
        |                   |                 |
Ai-->   |  GF(2^8) inverse  |  Affine mapping |  Bi
        |                   |                 |
```

S-box Ai = 0xC2
        (1100 0010)  A(x)=x^7 +x^6 +x
       A-1(x) in GF(2^8) = (2F)  = (0010 1111)
                                 = x^5 +x^3+x^2+x+1

multiply A(x)*A-1(x) =1 mod p(x)

P(x) for AES  = X^8 +X^4+x+1

